# VIIRSGlobalFlood

__Global inundation model using VIIRS satellite imagery__

## About

This repository contains code to run the UA-NASA global VIIRS inundation model. The model ingests single-day imagery from NASA's Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) sensor aboard the Suomi NPP, NOAA-20, and NOAA-21 satellites to generate per-pixel estimates of fractional inundated area (a continuous value between 0 and 1) at 375 m resolution. The repository contains code and instructions to obtain the VIIRS data and run the pre-trained global model to create inundation estimates.

## Project Structure

```
├── Download/            # Optional code to download the VIIRS data
│ ├── run_download.sh    # Shell script to modify arguments and run the data download script
│ ├── DownloadData.py    # Main data download python script
│ └── Helpers            # Folder containing helper functions for data download
├── Inference/           # Code to run inference
│ ├── run_inference.sh   # Shell script to modify arguments and run the inference script
│ ├── Inference.py       # Main inference python script
│ └── Helpers            # Folder containing helper functions for inference
├── *Data/               # Raw VIIRS data (e.g., LAADS-DAAC order downloads)
├── *Inputs/             # VIIRS input data in format required for inference
├── *Inferred/           # Output inundation estimates generated by the inference code
├── *ModelWeights/       # Folder containing the model weights file for inference
├── .gitignore           # Files/folders to ignore in git
├── requirements.txt     # Python dependencies
└── README.md            # This file containing description
```

__Note:__ folders in the project structure marked with a leading asterisk are ignored by git and will initially not be present. These folders will be created by the user when using the code.

## Setup

1) __Clone repository__: ```git clone https://github.com/Tellman-lab/VIIRSGlobalFlood.git``` and navigate to the repository ```cd VIIRSGlobalFlood```.
2) __Create an environment and install dependencies__: ```pip install -r requirements.txt```.
3) __Download the model weights file:__ from the [Releases](https://github.com/Tellman-lab/VIIRSGlobalFlood/releases/tag/v1.0.0) page and save the file ```model.pth``` in a folder named ```ModelWeights``` in the root path of this repository.
4) __(Optionally) create a NASA Earth Data account:__ which is necessary if you want to obtain VIIRS data using method (1) of Download Data described below. [Register](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/profile) for your free account and Generate Token. You will use your registered email and the API token in the Inference code if you download the data using method (1) of Download Data.
   
## Description and Usage

### Download Data

There are two options for obtaining the VIIRS scenes required to run inference and generate inundation predictions:

1. __Order the VIIRS scenes from the [LAADS-DAAC web portal](https://ladsweb.modaps.eosdis.nasa.gov/search/):__ This is the recommended method if you have a relatively small amount of data you want to generate predictions for (i.e., a small to moderate sized region of interest and a limited number of target dates). The benefit to this approach is that the pre-processing of the VIIRS scenes is handled on the LAADS DAAC server side. The output is a composite VIIRS scene on which the inference pipeline can be readily applied. Follow the steps below to create a VIIRS order using the LAADS DAAC web portal:
   
   * __Product:__ search for and select the product 'VNP09' (collection 5200), VIIRS imgary from the Suomi NPP satellite. You may also use the product 'VJ109' (collection 5200) if you prefer to use VIIRS imagery from the NOAA-20 satellite (note that SNPP and NOAA-20 have different overpass times so the flood predictions will not be identical).
   * __Time:__ enter a single date or date window.
   * __Location:__ enter a region of interest. LAADS-DAAC offers various options inlcuding drawing a box, entering corner coordinates, searching for a country or administrative area.
   * __Files:__ select all files.
   * __Review & order:__ select the 'Apply Post-Processing' drop down. Sds: select bands I1, I2, I3, M3, M4, M11, QF1, and QF2. Geo: check apply from search criteria. Mosaic: check geographically align. Reformat: select geoTIFF. Reproject: select Web Mercator. Submit order.
   * __Navigate to [Past Orders](https://ladsweb.modaps.eosdis.nasa.gov/search/history):__ to find the order number for the order you submitted. You will need this order number for the inference pipeline. When the data is ready, the order will show the status 'Available'. This can take as little as several minutes or as long as several days depending on the size of the order and other traffic on the web portal. Note that orders automatically expire after a period of 30 days.
   * __Note:__ If you follow this method, you will *not* need to use the code in the folder [Download](https://github.com/Tellman-lab/VIIRSGlobalFlood/blob/main/Download).    

2. __Use the [Download](https://github.com/Tellman-lab/VIIRSGlobalFlood/blob/main/Download) code to search the LAADS archive and apply pre-processing:__ This is the recommended method if you have a relatively large amount of data you want to generate predictions for (i.e., a large region of interest or many target dates). This approach uses the LAADS API v2 to search for and extract the raw VIIRS scenes. We then apply our own pre-processing pipeline to create the VIIRS data required for inference. The drawback to this method is that it the pre-processing takes longer than submitting an order via the LAADS-DAAC web portal. Follow the steps to use the Download code to extract VIIRS scenes and apply pre-processing:
   
   * Navigate into the folder ```cd Download```, activate your environment e.g., ```mamba activate myenv```, and __run ```./run_download.sh```__.
   * You should __update the arguments in the file ```run_download.sh```__ to reflect: (1) your region of interest (defined by north, south, east, and west coordinates, in decimal degrees), (2) your time window of interest (defined by a start and end date, in ```yyyy-mm-dd``` format), (3) your chosen VIIRS product (SNPP or NOAA-20). You may optionally define a ```--folderName``` in which to download the data for the search.
   * You may __optionally omit any of the steps__ by setting the ```--downloadFiles```, ```--reprojectFiles```, and ```--clipFiles``` arguments to ```n```.
   * The __output__ will be similar to the outputs generated using data download method (1), but on any given date you will have multiple granules from overlapping swaths captured at different overpass times. The inference code will generate separate predictions for each of these date-time granules. It is then up to the user to choose whether to apply additional post-processing to composite the predictions on a single day.    

### Inference

The __[Inference](https://github.com/Tellman-lab/VIIRSGlobalFlood/blob/main/Inference) code__ performs several steps, each of which can optionally be omitted:

1) __Get the LAADS-DAAC VIIRS order:__ if you followed method (1) above to download data, automatically extract the pre-processed VIIRS scenes from LAADS-DAAC using the order number you created and your login credentials (email and API key token). The code uses a simple wget command to extract the data, one .tif file per band. For this option to work, make sure you followed all of the steps described above in Download Data method (1). __Note__: if you followed method (2) above to download data, you will not need this step and should set the ```--downloadOrder``` argument to ```n``` in the file ```run_inference.sh```. See "Arguments for the inference code" below.  
2) __Resample the VIIRS data:__ to exactly 375 m and 750 m spatial resolution as required by the inference model. If you used the LAADS-DAAC web portal to order VIIRS data, the reprojected Web Mercator outputs are close but not exactly the spatial resolutions. This part performs a simple resampling to ensure the exact specifications are met for inference. 
3) __Prepare the band input files:__ create input .tif files in the format (i.e. folder and naming convention) required for inference. Perform a check to make sure all the required files are present before attempting inference. This is performed separately for every date and granule (i.e., every date-time) in your VIIRS inputs. From hereon, all processing is performed separately for each date and granule (i.e., every unique date-time) and data are created in sub folders named with the corresponding date (in yyyydoy format) and time. Where there is only one file for a given date, the time naming is omitted.
4) __Chip the band inputs:__ chip the input data into patches of size 256 x 256 pixels as required by the inference model. As in step (3), this is performed separately for every date and granule (i.e., every date-time) in your VIIRs inputs.
5) __Run inference:__ load the model weights and run the inference model on the chipped band inputs. Creates a chipped .tif raster file containing continous values between 0 and 1 for every pixel.
6) __Mosaic inferred chips:__ spatially merge the inferred chips to create a single inferred .tif raster output for each unique date-time.

__Description of folders created during inference:__

* __Data:__ the 'raw' VIIRS data, either downloaded from LAADS-DAAC web portal or via the manual pre-processing pipeline performed in Data Download. There must be one .tif file for each band including the band name within the file name (i.e., I1, I2, I3, M3, M4, M11, QF1), in Web Mercator projection.
* TODO: specify Data folder is expected + give example
* __Inputs:__ the VIIRS input data for model inference. Contains a copy of each band file from Data with naming convention simply the band name, then the chipped version of each band file at 256 x 256 pixel resolution.
* __Inferred:__ the inferred outputs containing continous values between 0 and 1 for every pixel.

__To run the inference code:__

Navigate into the folder ```cd Inference```, activate your environment e.g., ```mamba activate myenv```, and run ```./run_inference.sh```. 

__Arguments for the inference code:__

Arguments should be modified in the file ```run_inference.sh```. For a complete description of the arguments, navigate into the folder ```cd Inference```, activate your environment e.g., ```mamba activate myenv```, and run ```python Inference.py --help```. 

The only *required* argument is the ```---folderName```. This is the name of the folder containing the VIIRS data. If you downloaded the VIIRS data following download method (2), ```--folderName``` should match the ```--folderName``` used in the Download code, although this can be anything (e.g., Pakistan_FloodEvent_Sep2025). If you used the default option, a ```--folderName``` will have been created for you made up of your search options (the region coordinates and date window). However, if you downloaded your VIIRS data using the LAADS-DAAC order described in download method (1), the folder name must be the VIIRS order number generated automatically via LAADS-DAAC. As a reminder, you can obtain this order number by navigating to [Past Orders](https://ladsweb.modaps.eosdis.nasa.gov/search/history). 

You may provide one or multiple folder names. Simply provide them as a sequence of strings separated with blank spaces, e.g. ```502416879 test2 502416901```. The inference pipeline will run (in sequence) for each folder name provided.

Many of the optional arguments allow you to either include or omit steps of the pipeline described above depending on your needs. Under the default settings, all steps will be run and any existing files for the corresponding data folder (i.e., VIIRS order) will be overwritten. However, if for example you have already downloaded, prepared the VIIRS inputs, and created chips, you may choose to omit all stages prior to the inference step. To do so, you would set the relevant arguments to ```n``` in the file ```run_inference.sh```. __Note__: if you followed download method (2) to download data, you should set the ```--downloadOrder``` argument to ```n```. 

__Specific inference arguments worthy of note:__

* ```--maskClouds```: you may set cloud-obscured pixels in the output to no data value (-28672). This uses the default cloud mask in the raw VIIRS product. The default option is to keep predictions for all pixels. We recommend this because (a) the VIIRS cloud mask is known to be conservative (often an overestimate of cloud cover and can falsely identify water as clouds), and (b) the inference model is sometimes able to generate reliable predictions despite cloud cover thanks to the use of the SWIR bands which penetrate some thin clouds.  
* ```--imageBuffer``` and ```--gradientMethod```: these arguments control the feathering process applied to the inference. Feathering can help to reduce artifact predictions especially at the edge of inferred chips where some conditions (mostly cloud-cover) can cause artificial discontinuities. Feathering creates overlapping chips for inference and applies a weighting mask to carefully average predictions from multiple chips, acting somewhat like a majority voting system. By default, an image buffer of 64 pixels is applied which we found to be a reasonable tradeoff between effective feathering and computational efficiency. The gradient method may be changed from linear or sinusoidal but empirically we observed little difference between the methods. 

__Warning about regions that cross the 180 longitude line:__ 

If your region of interest spans the 180 longitude line, split your region into two parts and run the process separately for each part. For example, perform your data download (regardless of the method chosen) for two separate regions of interest. Then follow the rest of the process as usual, treating the two regions as separate folders for inference.

## Licence

MIT licence.

## Acknowledgements

This work was developed by [Jonathan Giezendanner](https://www.jgiezendanner.com/) and [Alex Saunders](https://alex-saunders00.github.io). The work was partly funded by NASA grant ***grant number***, PIs Fritz Policelli and Beth Tellman.

The reprojection tool was created by Rui Zhang.

Thank you to additional contributors, Rohit Mukherjee, Dan Slayback, and Rui Zhang. 
